---
layout: "post_1"
title:  "26 - Variance in Type Systems"
date:   2020-02-29
categories: podcast
anchor: https://anchor.fm/randomly-typed/embed/episodes/26---Variance-in-Type-Systems-eb5i39
description: "Type systems can be intimidating. Listen in as JS and Lance struggle to understand type variance! Contravariance, covariance, invariance, bivariance... What do they mean?!"
permalink: /26.html
---

# VARIANCE IN TYPE SYSTEMS

What languages do you use? Are they typed? How are they typed?

Strong vs Static types

Type system: a program. logic assigned by the programmer to represent all valid states a program can be in. This happens statically / at compile time. No need to actually run the program. Formalizes the logic any runtime variant of a program accepts

---


SOUNDNESS: If the type system says it’s valid, then the runtime is valid
COMPLETENESS: If the type system says it’s invalid, then the runtime isn’t valid

Ideally a type system is perfectly sound AND valid, but throwback to incompleteness theorems, we know that it can never be sure of 100% completeness.

---

Everything is straight-forward when you don’t with simple types.

Variance describes the rules of subtyping in a type system when dealing with _higher-kinded types_ like arrays, maps, and functions, which themselves relate to an inner type.
---


Strangeloop 2019
"Typing the Untyped: Soundness in Gradual Type Systems" by Ben Weissmann

---

## All Possible Types of Variance

The following is a description of all types of variances as they relate to the Array higher-kinded type. Some of these do not make sense for arrays, or are not desirable for arrays, but they may be so for other types. We're just using arrays here as an example to illustrate all possible types.

### Covariance

`Square` is a subtype of `Shape`, so `[Square]` is a subtype of `[Shape]`

### Contravariance
`Square` is a subtype of `Shape`, so `[Shape]` is a subtype of `[Square]`

### Invariance
`Square` is a subtype of `Shape`, but `[Square]` is completely unrelated to and distinct from `[Shape]`

### Bivariance
`Square` is a subtype of `Shape`, so `[Square]` is both a subtype _and_ supertype of `[Shape]`

## Variance Rules

Generally speaking:
- _Producers_ are _covariant_
    - Function return types are _producers_, so they're _covariant_ in their return types
- _Consumers_ are _contravariant_
    - Function argument types are _consumers_, so they're _contravariant_ in their argument types.
- _Arrays_ and _hashmaps_ are usually _invariant_. **However**, if you guarantee that your array is:
    - _only_ a producer (aka. read-only), then it can be _covariant_
    - _only_ a consumer (aka. write-only), then it can be _contravariant_
        - ... but practically speaking, if something is writeable, then it's also readable

These rules are derived solely based on their _substitutability_. More examples below!

## Producers

- Let's look at this hierarchy: `Entertainment` > `Music` > `Metal`
- Now let's look at the _producers_ of these types: `Producer of Entertainment` > `Producer of Music` > `Producer of Metal`


- If you consume some `Entertainment`, you can ask a `Producer of Entertainment`, a `Producer of Music`, or a `Producer of Metal`, and nothing can go wrong.
- If you consume `Music`, you can ask a `Producer of Music`, or a `Producer of Metal`, and nothing can go wrong.
- If you consume `Metal`, you can ask a `Producer of Metal`, and nothing can go wrong.

## Consumers

- Let's look at this hierarchy: `Enery Sources` > `Vegetables` > `Bamboo`
- Now let's look at the _consumers_ of these types: `Consumer of Enery Sources` &lt; `Consumer of Vegetables` &lt; `Consumer of Bamboo`

- If you produce some `Energy Sources`, you can ask a `Consumer of Energy Sources`, and nothing can go wrong.
- If you produce some `Vegetables`, you can ask a `Consumer of Energy Sources`, or a `Consumer of Vegetables`, and nothing can go wrong.
- If you produce some `Bamboo`, you can ask a `Consumer of Energy Sources`, a `Consumer of Vegetables`, or a `Consumer of Bamboo`, and nothing can go wrong.

## Arrays and Hashes

Let's say we have the following structure.

```
  Shape (parent or interface)
 /     \
Square  Circle (children)
```

Arrays are _invariant_ because they cannot be covariant or contravariant:
- _Unsound with covariance_: Function accepts `[Shape]` in parameter position, and `[Square]` is passed on invocation as an argument. This is unsound, because since the function accepts a `[Shape]`, it could add a `Circle` to the array, but the array was initially declared of type `[Square]`.
- _Unsound with contravariance_: Function accepts `[Square]` in parameter position, and `[Shape]` is passed on innovation as an argument. This is unsound, because the function can only read `Square`s, but since we pass a `[Shape]`, we're able to supply a `[Circle]`.
- _Unsound with bivariance_: Arrays are unsound with bivariance because they are unsound with either covariance or contravariance.
