---
layout: "post_1"
title:  "25 - CQRS: Command-Query Responsibility Segregation"
date:   2020-02-15 -0400
categories: podcast
anchor: https://anchor.fm/randomly-typed/embed/episodes/25---CQRS-Command-Query-Responsibility-Segregation-earj8a
description: "CRUD isn’t the only way! Lance and JS talk about how separating reads from writes in your domain models can open up a world of possibilities."
permalink: /25.html
---

# CQRS (Command-Query Responsibility Segregation) <span class="footnote"></span>

## What’s CRUD?
- Conceptual model where we can Create, Read, Update, and Delete a record in a datastore for that model.

# What?
- At it’s simplest: using a different model or service from writing and reading information.
- It’s taking CRUD and turning it into R | CUD
- This allows for multiple differents representations of data, sometimes simultaneously. Different access patterns depending on the domain.

## Why?
- For very complex use cases, having the same conceptual model for commands and queries makes things more difficult to follow and requires compromises for both these queries and commands.
- Much more flexible. Eg. Reads could be run on a completely separate physical server.

# Most people take it a few steps further
- Update and read models are separate but are no longer backed by the same table or datastore.
  - Allows independent scaling, access patterns and optimization strategies for reads and writes
  - Allows complex modeling like reads which depend on multiple models, collapsing multiple writes into a single read, read from different models based on complex validation, etc.
  - Requires some sort of propagation from write system to read system

# Why not?
- More complexity and maintenance (eg. multiple models to know about)
- If using separate tables or databases, achieving full consistency becomes less straight-forward and can lead to resorting to eventual consistency instead.
  - Highly available, but not guarantees around safety.

# General notes:
- Fits well with event-based programming models, event collaboration, event sourcing

<span class="footnotes">
  <a href="https://martinfowler.com/bliki/CQRS.html">[1] https://martinfowler.com/bliki/CQRS.html</a>
</span>
